The Battle of Gaugamela was fought in 331 BC. An army of the League of Corinth under Macedonian leadership had invaded Persia, defeating multiple Persian armies over the last few years and advancing deep into enemy territory. They were led by Macedonian King Alexander (later to be called the Great) and numbered around 50,000 soldiers, about 7,000 of whom were cavalry and the rest infantry.
The Persian army they faced consisted of over 100,000, meaning twice to three times as many soldiers. Ancient sources recall even multiple times greater sizes, but modern historians believe them to be highly exaggerated. Either way, it was the biggest army Alexander ever faced in the Persian campaign. Approximately 40,000 were cavalry; the Persians also deployed 200 scythed chariots and 15 war elephants.
 They were led by Persian king Darius III, who had been awaiting the Macedonian army on a plain a few miles east of the river Tigris. Near the small town of (obviously) Gaugamela. Darius had ordered to flatten the terrain, removing bushes, stones, etc., to maximize the effectiveness of his chariots and also cavalry.
 On the day of the battle, the Macedonians lined up in front of the Persians. The left and right flanks of both armies consisted almost solely of cavalry. Darius III was positioned in the very center, protected by his elite infantry. Alexander led his right flank of cavalry. Because of the Macedonian numerical inferiority and the resulting narrowness of their formation, they were at great risk of getting flanked and encircled. To prevent that, both Macedonian flanks were bent backward by 45 degrees. Alexander also kept reserves at the back.
The battle started with Alexander's cavalry moving outward. The Persian left wing, to prevent encirclement of their own, followed by doing the same. As the Macedonian right wing got close to the flattened terrain's edge, they were charged at by the Persian cavalry force, who wanted to stop the Macedonians from pushing the battle away from their advantageous flat ground. Simultaneously, the right Persian flank attacked the left Macedonian flank. Fierce cavalry clashes ensued on both flanks. But because on both sides the Persian cavalry was larger and very skilled, they both partially flanked the Macedonian cavalry on the outside and inflicted higher casualties than they took.
 At this point in the center, the chariots charged at the Macedonian formation. Then, the Macedonians opened passages in their formation, where the chariots drove through and  were attacked by the Macedonian infantry. This worked very well: the intimidating chariots were rendered basically harmless and defeated quickly.
 While the cavalry fight continued on both flanks, some of the central infantry moved forward and tried to break through the Macedonian Phalanx in the center.
 Alexander, still fighting on his right wing, realized his opportunity had come. With the Persian left wing being drawn to the side and many of their remaining forces far off in engagement with the Macedonians, a gap had opened, and Darius III was left relatively unprotected. Alexander took some of the cavalry fighting on the right and charged directly at Darius' royal guard. He also ordered all his infantry divisions not yet involved in the fighting to do the same.
 Alexander managed to get closer and closer to Darius III. And the Persian king, afraid of dying or being captured, fled. This was seen by the Macedonians as an act of cowardice. Noticing their king fleeing broke the Persian morale, and without a leader's orders, the Persian center was disrupted and scattered. Many were killed or captured. Alexander, however, was forced to not pursue Darius, as he was told his cavalry forces on both flanks were still on the brink of being overrun and desperately needed help. And also, their camp was being raided by Persians who had found a gap in the Macedonian formation.
The Macedonians, now controlling almost the entire battlefield, after intense fighting, ended up defeating the remaining Persian cavalry forces.  Macedon had decisively won. The Battle of Gaugamela marked one of Alexander's biggest victories, led to his capture of the heart of the Persian kingdom, and resulted in the collapse of resistance to his invasion.
